docs: Add uv guide (#932)
apify/apify-sdk-python: docs/03_guides/10_uv.mdx

---
id: uv
title: Project management with uv
description: Manage your Actor's Python version, dependencies, and virtual environment with the uv package and project manager.
---

import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock';
import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

import PyprojectExample from '!!raw-loader!./code/uv_project/pyproject.toml';
import MainExample from '!!raw-loader!./code/uv_project/my_actor/main.py';
import UnderscoreMainExample from '!!raw-loader!./code/uv_project/my_actor/__main__.py';
import DockerfileExample from '!!raw-loader!./code/uv_project/Dockerfile';

> In this guide, you'll learn how to use [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) to manage your Apify Actor projects - from creating a new project, through running it locally, to building and deploying it on the Apify platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this guide, you'll learn how to use [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) to manage your Apify Actor projects. From creating a project and running it locally to building and deploying it on the Apify platform.
```

## Introduction

> [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) is an extremely fast Python package and project manager. It replaces the combination of pip, virtualenv, and similar tools with a single binary that manages your project's Python version, virtual environment, and dependencies. It records the project metadata in the standard [`pyproject.toml`](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/writing-pyproject-toml/) file and the exact resolved versions of all dependencies in a [`uv.lock`](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/concepts/projects/sync/) lockfile.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) is a Python package and project manager. It replaces the combination of pip, virtualenv, and similar tools with a single binary that manages your project's Python version, virtual environment, and dependencies. It records the project metadata in the standard [`pyproject.toml`](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/writing-pyproject-toml/) file and the exact resolved versions of all dependencies in a [`uv.lock`](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/concepts/projects/sync/) lockfile.
```

The [Python Actor templates](https://apify.com/templates/categories/python) declare their dependencies in a `requirements.txt` file, which is the default approach for Actors. Using uv instead brings a few advantages:

> - The lockfile guarantees that the dependencies installed in the Actor's Docker image are exactly the ones you developed and tested against locally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The lockfile guarantees that the dependencies installed in the Actor's Docker image are exactly the ones that you locally developed and tested against.
```

- Dependency installation during the Docker build is significantly faster than with pip, especially with a warm cache.

> - During local development, a single tool manages your Python version, virtual environment, and dependencies, so the project behaves the same on every developer's machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- During local development, a single tool manages your Python version, virtual environment, and dependencies. As a result, the project behaves the same on every developer's machine.
```

:::info Actor templates don't support uv yet

> The [Apify Actor templates](https://apify.com/templates) currently support only pip with `requirements.txt`. Adding uv-based templates is planned - follow [apify/actor-templates#350](https://github.com/apify/actor-templates/issues/350) for updates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Apify Actor templates](https://apify.com/templates) currently support only pip with `requirements.txt`. Adding uv-based templates is planned. For updates, follow [apify/actor-templates#350](https://github.com/apify/actor-templates/issues/350).
```

:::

> To follow along, install [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/) and the [Apify CLI](https://docs.apify.com/cli/docs/installation) first.

Reviewer: I'd bump this info into a separate section titled `Before you start`.

## Create a new project

> Create a new uv project and add the Apify SDK to its dependencies:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a new uv project and add the Apify SDK to its dependencies, use:
```

```bash
uv init my-actor --bare
cd my-actor
uv python pin 3.14
uv add apify
```

> The [`uv init`](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/reference/cli/#uv-init) command with the `--bare` option creates just the `pyproject.toml` project manifest. The `uv python pin` command writes the project's Python version to the `.python-version` file - uv automatically downloads that Python version if it's not installed on your machine. Finally, [`uv add`](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/reference/cli/#uv-add) records the dependency in `pyproject.toml`, resolves the exact versions of the whole dependency tree into `uv.lock`, and installs everything into the project's virtual environment in `.venv`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Where:
- [`uv init`](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/reference/cli/#uv-init) with the `--bare` option creates the `pyproject.toml` project manifest.
- `uv python pin` writes the project's Python version to the `.python-version` file. uv automatically downloads that Python version if it's not installed on your machine.
- [`uv add`](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/reference/cli/#uv-add) records the dependency in `pyproject.toml`, resolves the exact versions of the whole dependency tree into `uv.lock`, and installs everything into the project's virtual environment in `.venv`.
```

> The `uv add` command constrains the dependency to the latest version it resolved. You can edit the constraint as you see fit - this guide's example Actor allows any version of the SDK within the current major one:

Reviewer: The `uv add` command constrains the dependency to the latest version it resolved. You can edit the constraint, the example Actor in this guide allows any version of the SDK within the current major one:

<CodeBlock className="language-toml" title="pyproject.toml">
    {PyprojectExample}
</CodeBlock>

> Note that the example has no `[build-system]` section. Without one, uv treats the project as a non-package ("virtual") project: it doesn't try to build and install the project itself, it only manages its dependencies. That's exactly what we want here - the Actor runs as a module straight from the source tree.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the example has no `[build-system]` section. Without one, uv treats the project as a non-package ("virtual") project: it doesn't try to build and install the project itself, it only manages its dependencies. As a result, the Actor runs as a module straight from the source tree.
```

## Add the Actor scaffolding

For the project to be runnable as an Actor, it needs two more pieces: the source code as a runnable Python package, and the `.actor/` directory with the [Actor configuration](https://docs.apify.com/platform/actors/development/actor-definition/actor-json).

> Create a `my_actor` package with the Actor's source code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a `my_actor` package with the Actor's source code:
```

<Tabs>
    <TabItem value="my_actor/main.py" label="my_actor/main.py" default>
        <CodeBlock className="language-python">
            {MainExample}
        </CodeBlock>
    </TabItem>
    <TabItem value="my_actor/__main__.py" label="my_actor/__main__.py">
        <CodeBlock className="language-python">
            {UnderscoreMainExample}
        </CodeBlock>
    </TabItem>
</Tabs>

> Don't forget to add an empty `my_actor/__init__.py` file, so that the directory is a regular Python package executable with `python -m my_actor`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Add an empty `my_actor/__init__.py` file, so that the directory is a regular Python package executable with `python -m my_actor`.
```

> Then add the Actor definition to `.actor/actor.json`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Add the Actor definition to `.actor/actor.json`:
```

```json title=".actor/actor.json"
{
    "$schema": "https://apify.com/schemas/v1/actor.ide.json",
    "actorSpecification": 1,
    "name": "my-actor",
    "title": "My uv Actor",
    "description": "An Apify Actor with dependencies managed by uv.",
    "version": "0.1",
    "buildTag": "latest",
    "dockerfile": "../Dockerfile"
}
```

> The `dockerfile` field points to the project's `Dockerfile`, which doesn't exist yet - you'll create it in the [Use uv in the Dockerfile](#use-uv-in-the-dockerfile) section below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `dockerfile` field points to the project's `Dockerfile`, which doesn't exist yet. You'll create it in the [Use uv in the Dockerfile](#use-uv-in-the-dockerfile) section.
```

The final project structure looks like this:

```text
my-actor/
├── .actor/
│   └── actor.json
├── my_actor/
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── __main__.py
│   └── main.py
├── .python-version
├── Dockerfile
├── pyproject.toml
└── uv.lock
```

Make sure to commit `uv.lock` and `.python-version` to version control, so that every developer's machine works with identical dependencies and the same Python version. The Actor's Docker build gets its Python interpreter from the base image instead, so keep the base image tag (`apify/actor-python:3.14`) in sync with `.python-version`.

## Run the Actor locally

> If you've just cloned the project (or skipped `uv add` above), install the dependencies first:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you've just cloned the project or skipped the `uv add` command, install the dependencies first:
```

```bash
uv sync
```

> The [`uv sync`](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/reference/cli/#uv-sync) command creates the `.venv` virtual environment (if it doesn't exist yet) and installs the locked dependencies into it. Then run the Actor with the Apify CLI:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`uv sync`](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/reference/cli/#uv-sync) command creates the `.venv` virtual environment (if it doesn't exist yet) and installs the locked dependencies into it. Then, run the Actor with the Apify CLI:
```

```bash
apify run
```

> The [`apify run`](https://docs.apify.com/cli/docs/reference#apify-run) command automatically detects the virtual environment in `.venv` and uses it to run the Actor as a module (`python -m my_actor`), with the environment set up to emulate the Apify platform locally - for example, the Actor input is read from `storage/key_value_stores/default/INPUT.json`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`apify run`](https://docs.apify.com/cli/docs/reference#apify-run) command automatically detects the virtual environment in `.venv` and uses it to run the Actor as a module (`python -m my_actor`), with the environment set up to emulate the Apify platform locally. For example, the Actor input is read from `storage/key_value_stores/default/INPUT.json`.
```

## Use uv in the Dockerfile

On the Apify platform, the Actor runs as a Docker container built from the Dockerfile referenced in `.actor/actor.json`. The following Dockerfile installs the locked dependencies with uv on top of the [Apify Python base image](https://hub.docker.com/r/apify/actor-python):

<CodeBlock className="language-docker" title="Dockerfile">
    {DockerfileExample}
</CodeBlock>

> A few details worth understanding:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that:
```

- The uv binary is copied from its [official Docker image](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/guides/integration/docker/), pinned to a minor version line, so builds are reproducible and there is no need to install uv with pip.
- `uv sync --locked --no-dev` installs the dependencies exactly as recorded in `uv.lock` and skips development dependencies. If the lockfile is missing or out of sync with `pyproject.toml`, the build fails instead of silently resolving different versions.
- The dependencies are installed in a separate layer before the source code is copied, so editing your code doesn't invalidate the dependency layer, and rebuilds are fast.
- Putting `.venv/bin` first on `PATH` makes `python` resolve to the project's virtual environment, both during the build and when the Actor runs.

> Also create a `.dockerignore` file and exclude at least `.venv`, `.git`, and `storage` from the Docker build context - the local virtual environment must never be copied into the image, since it's recreated by `uv sync` during the build.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also create a `.dockerignore` file and exclude at least `.venv`, `.git`, and `storage` from the Docker build context. The local virtual environment must never be copied into the image, since it's recreated by `uv sync` during the build.
```
